Brain abscess caused by Streptococcus pyogenes with atypical symptoms: a case report and literature review
Chun-Zhen Hua, Zhi-Peng Shen, Ming-Ming Zhou, Can Lai, Guan-Nan Bai, Wei-Zhong Gu, Yong-Ping Xie, Jin-Si Zhou, Wei-Lin Hu & Qiang Shu
Abstract
Background
Streptococcus pyogenes is a common gram-positive bacterium, belonging to group A Streptococcus (GAS), and is responsible for causing a range of clinical conditions. Brain abscess caused by GAS is uncommon in pediatric infectious diseases, and GAS brain abscess without acute infectious symptoms has been rarely reported.
Case presentation
We present a case of one GAS brain abscess in a previously healthy child with unusual clinical manifestations of decreased muscle strength in the left limbs. The right frontal lobe mass lesion was resected using a microscope-based neuronavigation system. A sole defectively beta-hemolytic Streptococcus pyogenes was isolated from the lesion. The patient’s peripheral blood whole-exome and the pathogen’s whole-genome sequencing were performed respectively, revealing a heterozygous mutation in the interferon regulatory factor-8 (IRF8) gene in the patient and lack of hyaluronic acid capsules in Streptococcus pyogenes (genotype emm22). The patient eventually recovered after prompt surgical drainage of the abscess and appropriate antibiotic treatment.
Conclusions
It is important to pay attention to Streptococcus pyogenes brain abscesses with mild clinical manifestations. Upon reviewing all the cases of pediatric GAS brain abscess reported in the published literature, we discovered that early diagnosis and treatment are crucial factors that impact the prognosis of GAS brain abscess.
Background
Streptococcus pyogenes, a member of the group A Streptococcus (GAS) family, is a common pathogen causing skin and soft tissue infection, suppurative pharyngitis, tonsillitis, and scarlatina [1]. Recent reports of the re-emergence of invasive GAS infections have exacerbated public health concerns [2]. GAS has rarely been reported as a cause of brain abscess, a life-threatening infection in children [3, 4]. The clinical symptoms of GAS brain abscess are usually severe, such as high fever, severe headache, and projectile vomiting [5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13]. However, we here report a rare case of GAS brain abscess caused by Streptococcus pyogenes in which the initial symptom was only mild decreased muscle strength in the left limbs. Additionally, we summarize the 13 pediatric GAS brain abscess cases from the literature.
Case presentation
A previously healthy 2-year-old girl was admitted to our hospital with a primary complaint of decreased muscle strength in the left limbs for three days. She did not report any fever, rashes, headache, vomiting, sore throat, or cough. Her temperature, respiratory rate, heart rate, and blood pressure were all within normal range. Two weeks before admission, her parents squeezed a skin abscess (about 1-centimeter-diameter) on her left leg, which healed soon. She had no history of suppurative tonsillitis, pharyngitis, otitis media, mastoiditis, or sinusitis, and had never undergone bacterial culture testing. The parents denied any history of streptococcal infection, medical issues, or psychosocial problems within the family.
Her physical examinations on admission were normal, but a Medical Research Council grade 4 weakness could be detected in her left limbs. Brain-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a right frontal lobe mass lesion, which was suggestive of a high-grade glioma or cerebral abscess (Fig. 1, a1–4). The abdominal B-ultrasonic examination, electroencephalography, and chest computed tomography scan showed no abnormality.
Brain MRI images of the patient. Note a1–4, scanned before the operation. The axial T1-weighted image (a1) and T2-weighted image (a2) show the right frontal lobe had a large cavity which is a low signal in the T1 and a high signal in the T2; the axial (a3) and coronal T1-weighted contrast enhancement images (a4) show the ringwise enhanced lesion and peripheral edema without contrast enhancement. b1–4, scanned on the 19th day after the operation. The axial T1-weighted image (b1) and T2-weighted image (b2) show the lesion absorbed and narrowed considerably; the axial and coronal T1-weighted contrast enhancement images (b3, b4) show the ringwise enhanced lesion shrank obviously. c1 and c2, scanned 3 months after the operation. The axial T1-weighted image (c1) and T2-weighted image (c2) show the lesion was cured essentially
On the third hospital day, the patient suffered convulsions in the left leg for 3–4 min. A lumbar puncture was carried out, and the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)showed normal levels of cells, glucose, and protein. The CSF culture was negative. Additionally, the blood cultures also yielded negative results. The patient received the sodium valproate injection (32 mg/kg) for four days. Two days later, the patient developed a fever, and on the next day, deep supratentorial lesions were resected using a microscope-based neuronavigation system. Intraoperatively, a localized, soft, and fish-like lesion was found at the top of the frontal lobe (Fig. 2). A thick abscess wall was observed after draining 10 mL of thick pus. A drainage tube was placed in the cavity formed after the excision of the abscess wall. In the process of operation, cefuroxime (50 mg/kg) was used via intravenous drip.
Preoperative and postoperative visual fields. Note a, the frontal lobe mass lesion; b and c, thick pus in the abscess; d, thick abscess wall was found after pus was drawn off; e, abscess wall was moved
The abscess material was aspirated and then transferred to the clinical laboratory for aerobic and anaerobic culture. A sole defectively-beta-hemolytic Streptococcus pyogenes was isolated, which was identified by using both the VITEK COMPACT system (Mérieux, France) and matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (Bruker, Germany), and further identification was performed by 16 S rRNA analysis. No anaerobes were identified. The antimicrobial susceptibility test was performed by using the Kirby-Bauer method according to the criteria of the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (M100-ED31). Antibiotics susceptibility test showed that it was sensitive to penicillin, ceftriaxone, vancomycin, and linezolid, but resistant to erythromycin and sulfamethoxazole. The histopathological findings of the removed tissue revealed partially liquefied brain tissue with collections of neutrophils and numerous pus cells (Fig. 3).
Hematoxylin and eosin stain of the partially liquefied brain tissue (×200)
After surgery, the patient was promptly given empirical antibiotic therapy with vancomycin (20 mg/kg, q8h, 20 days) and meropenem (40 mg/kg, 12 days), and also took oral levetiracetam (10 mg/kg, 12 days). Seven days later, the abscess cavity drainage tube was removed. The patient’s condition improved postoperatively, with decreasing white blood cell (WBC) counts, neutrophil counts, and C-reactive protein (CRP) levels (Fig. 4). MRIs 19 days after the operation showed almost complete resolution of the abscess (Fig. 1, bFigs. 1, 2, 3 and 4). Starting from the 26th day, the patient began oral linezolid treatment (5 days in the hospital and 7 days after discharge). On the last hospital day (29th day), the anti-hemolysin O antibody was measured at 8.8 IU/mL, and the levels of immunoglobulin A, G, and E were normal, so the patient was discharged. Three months later, follow-up MRIs showed complete recovery (Fig. 1, cFigs. 1 and 2). After 6 months of follow-up, the patient had no seizures and no obvious neurological sequelae.
Changing of WBC counts, neutrophil counts, and CRP levels over time. A WBC counts and neutrophil counts in peripheral blood. B CRP levels in peripheral blood during the course of the illness
Since some rare genetic diseases such as dystonia and seizures may show similar clinical manifestations with central nervous system infections, the possibility of the patient’s congenital immune deficiency should be excluded. During the hospitalization, whole-exome sequencing was performed by MyGenostics Inc. (Beijing, China) based on the patient and her parents’ peripheral blood samples. No immunodeficiency disease was identified, except a C497T (Pro166Leu) heterozygous mutation in the IRF8, inherited from the patient’s mother (Fig. 5).
Sequences including a C497T heterozygous mutation in IRF8 gene. Note The arrowed locus was the 497 bp mutation locus in the IRF8 gene from the patient (up), her father (middle), and mother (down), and C497T base mutation causing Pro166Leu mutation in the production of the IRF8 gene
At the same time, the whole-genome sequencing of the isolated Streptococcus pyogenes was performed by Majorbio Bio-Pharm Technology Co. Ltd. (Shanghai, China). The complete genome sequence has been deposited in NCBI GenBank under accession number PRJNA835576 (BioProject) and Chromosome CP097251 (GenBank). Genetic analysis based on the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Streptococcus laboratory database revealed that this isolation belonged to the genotype emm22 and sequence type 46 (ST46).
Discussion and conclusions
Brain abscess caused by Streptococcus pyogenes belongs to a rare invasive infectious disease and might be associated with adjacent infection lesions, such as otitis media, mastoiditis, and sinusitis [3, 4]. Based on the literature published since 1988, only 13 pediatric cases have been reported (Table 1) [6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14]. Clinical manifestations in patients with invasive GAS infection were usually acute and severe, such as high fever, chills, weakness, and mental fatigue. Except for one case (NM) and the one we presented here, all the other reported cases (11/11, 100%) had acute severe clinical presentations, including fever (n = 8), vomiting (n = 7), lethargy (n = 6), headache (n = 2) and nuchal rigidity (n = 2) [6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13]. In this case, the patient’s clinical manifestations were mild, only decreased muscle strength. The patient did not have otitis media complication, however, she had a history of pre-infection as a skin abscess in the left leg two weeks ago. In our previous studies about the invasive Streptococcus pyogenes disease, 31.8% of the patients had skin or soft tissue infections as predisposing factors [5]. We speculated that the skin abscess might be caused by the GAS infection, and the bacterium might invade the bloodstream in the process of extrusion, break through the blood-brain barrier, and form a brain abscess. The abscess wall in the brain was thick, which was consistent with the long course of the disease. Although GAS brain abscesses are life-threatening infections, a satisfactory recovery (83.33%, 10/12) could be found with early diagnosis and appropriate treatment [6,7,8, 12,13,14]. In our previous study, Streptococcus pyogenes showed sensitivity to penicillin, ceftriaxone, cefotaxime, vancomycin, and linezolid [5]. Similar to the reported GAS brain abscess antibiotic treatment (Table 1) [7,8,9, 12,13,14], in this case, cefuroxime was administered via an intravenous drip during surgery, and empirical antibiotic therapy with vancomycin and meropenem was performed after surgery. After the pathogen was identified as GAS, meropenem was not promptly discontinued, and vancomycin was replaced by oral linezolid for 12 days after 20 days of treatment. The overall antibiotic treatment lasted 32 days. The assessment of antibiotic susceptibility in Streptococcus pyogenes isolates is essential for the formulation of efficacious therapeutic strategies. In this case, our findings indicate that Streptococcus pyogenes exhibits susceptibility to penicillin, ceftriaxone, vancomycin, and linezolid while resisting erythromycin and sulfamethoxazole. Given the rarity of penicillin-nonsusceptible strains, penicillin G remains the antibiotic of choice for treating infections attributable to Streptococcus pyogenes. Macrolides have been conventionally employed as alternative therapeutic agents when patients exhibit penicillin allergy. However, our preceding research revealed a concerning prevalence of resistance, with 88.9% of clinical isolates exhibiting resistance to erythromycin and 81.4% to clindamycin, suggesting that macrolides may not constitute viable alternatives in China [5]. For the management of brain abscesses induced by Streptococcus pyogenes, a combinatorial regimen of penicillin G with either vancomycin or linezolid is advocated as the optimal treatment protocol. The standard duration for antibiotic therapy spans 4 to 6 weeks. In the event of penicillin allergy, non-beta lactam antibiotics such as vancomycin or linezolid are preferred, which pass into the CSF better.This individualized approach to antibiotic therapy is designed to optimize clinical outcomes and to minimize the risks inherent to antibiotic resistance.
Table 1 Overview of pediatric case reports on GAS brain abscess
The patient’s mild symptoms were probably due to the mild reaction between the pathogen and the host. On the one hand, the patient’s immune deficiency might cause weak response to the pathogen. On the other hand, toxin-deficient bacteria could invade the host with increased intracellular persistence and decreased inflammatory response.
In this study, we found an undefined heterozygous mutation of IRF8 (Pro166Leu) in the patient from her mother. To date, only a few studies reported that mutations in IRF8 were associated with infectious disease, most of them focus on the biallelic mutation which leads to dysfunctional neutrophilia and monocytopenia, causing repeated even fatal infection [15, 16]. There were only 8 patients diagnosed with infectious disease due to IRF8 heterozygous mutations. Heterozygous mutation at Thr80Ala (n = 2) presented with disseminated infection after Bacillus Calmette-Guerin administration [17]; compound heterozygous mutation at Agr83Cys/ Arg291Gln (n = 1) presented with repeated viral infectionc [15]; compound heterozygous mutation at Ala201Val/ Pro224Leu (n = 1) presented with infectious mononucleosis caused by Epstein-Barr virus infection [18]; heterozygous mutations at Ala201Val (n = 1), Thr96Met (n = 1), and Gly139Ser (n = 1) presented with pulmonary nontuberculous mycobacterial disease [18]; heterozygous mutations at Ala179Val (n = 1) presented with disseminated nontuberculous mycobacterial disease [18]. No IRF8 (Pro166Leu) heterozygous mutation-related disease has been reported. One pedigree study showed that the sister and brother who had a single heterozygous mutation (Ala201Val or Pro224Leu) of the patient (Ala201Val/ Pro224Leu) had a similar but mild history of infection and hospitalization [18]. However, no immune deficiency history of infection and hospitalizations was declared by the patient’s mother who has the same IRF8 heterozygous mutation. Whether the heterozygous mutation Pro166Leu in IRF8 is consistently related to the decreased immune function requires further investigation.
The emm gene encoded major virulence factor M protein was also the epidemiological typing tool of Streptococcus pyogenes. It has been reported that emm1, emm28, emm3, and emm12 were the top four common causes of severe invasive GAS infection [7]. Based on the previous research, 50% (4/8) cases were caused by emm1 [9, 12,13,14]. The isolate in this study was Streptococcus pyogenes. emm22/ST46, which was uncommon in China and never reported to be associated with pediatric GAS brain abscesses before. Based on the genome sequence analysis, we found this isolation lacked the hasABC hyaluronic acid capsule biosynthesis genes. It was similar to other reported emm22 strains which didn’t produce the detectable hyaluronic acid capsule [19]. There was a broad consensus among researchers that hyaluronic acid capsules were required for producing invasive infections. However, the GAS brain abscess case we presented here supported the point that GAS emm22 lost capsules but retained the ability to cause sterile-site infections.
In conclusion, the GAS brain abscess was a rare invasive disease. However, the case we presented here reminded us that this infection has occult clinical manifestations. Our case supported previous findings that a satisfactory prognosis can be obtained after prompt surgical abscess drainage and appropriate antibiotic treatment.
Abbreviations
GAS:Group A Streptococcus
MRI:Magnetic resonance imaging
IRF8:Interferon regulatory factor-8
CSF:Cerebrospinal fluid
WBC:White blood cell
CRP:C-reactive protein
ST46:Sequence type 46
NM:Not mention
CXM:Cefuroxime
PCG:Penicillin G
CAP:Chloramphenicol
MNZ:Metronidazole
AMX:Amoxicillin
MEPM:Meropenem
VCM:Vancomycin
CTRX:Ceftriaxone
BPC:Benzylpenicillin
CLDM:Clindamycin
CTX:Cefotaxime
LNZ:Linezolid